Below is a clean, professional, engineering-style document that explains the buffering mechanism, why the lag occurs, and three alternative designs with their advantages and disadvantages.

You can use this directly in internal documentation, Confluence, or JIRA.


---

1. Overview

This document explains the observed latency in token streaming within the Chat Completion SSE pipeline. Although the upstream LLM returns tokens with very low latency (typically in the range of microseconds to milliseconds), the UI experiences noticeable delays (2–7 seconds) before receiving parts of the model response.

Investigation shows that the delay originates in the server-side buffering strategy implemented in astream_handler of chat_completions.py, not in the model or upstream API.


---

2. What the Current Pipeline Does

1. The LLM streams tokens asynchronously to the backend (llm.astream).


2. Each received token is appended to an in-memory buffer list.


3. The server waits until the buffer reaches a configured buffer_value (e.g., 25 tokens).


4. Only when the buffer is full, the server flushes it as a single SSE chunk to the UI.


5. This repeats until the entire output is processed.



The relevant logic:

buffer = []
buffer.append(token)

if len(buffer) >= buffer_value:
    flush buffer to UI

Since the LLM emits tokens approximately every 0.3–0.7 seconds in the logs, waiting for 25 tokens results in a delay of approximately:

25 tokens × (0.3–0.7 sec/token) = 7.5 sec worst-case, ~3 sec average

Thus, the majority of UI latency is introduced after the token arrives from the model and before it is flushed over SSE.


---

3. Purpose of the Buffer

The buffer exists to batch tokens and reduce the overhead associated with:

frequent SSE writes,

frequent string concatenation,

increased network traffic,

pressure on client-side rendering loops.


A buffer can improve throughput and system stability under high concurrency, but it always introduces additional user-perceived latency.


---

4. Why the Buffer Causes Lag

The delay is proportional to:

1. Token arrival interval from the model.


2. Configured buffer_value.



If the buffer_value is large, the backend waits longer before emitting SSE messages. The LLM itself may be fast, but the batching stage masks that speed and introduces multi-second gaps between UI updates.


---

5. Alternative Buffering Strategies

Below are three viable approaches, depending on whether the priority is latency, throughput, or system load.


---

Approach A: Immediate Flush (buffer_value = 1)

Description

Each token received from the LLM is streamed directly to the UI without batching.

Advantages

Lowest possible latency.

UI receives tokens in near real-time (similar to ChatGPT).

User experience feels responsive and conversational.


Disadvantages

Highest number of SSE writes.

Increased CPU and network overhead per response.

Slightly higher rendering workload for the client.


Suitable When

Conversational, chat-like UI is required.

Responsiveness is more important than throughput efficiency.



---

Approach B: Small Fixed Buffer (buffer_value = 3–5)

Description

Tokens are batched in small groups. The backend streams as soon as 3–5 tokens accumulate.

Advantages

Significantly lower latency than a large buffer.

Reduces overhead compared to token-by-token streaming.

Still provides a smooth, near-realtime streaming UX.


Disadvantages

Minor but noticeable delays (typically <150 ms).

Performance depends on variability of token arrival intervals.


Suitable When

A balance between UI responsiveness and backend load is desired.

Applications must scale but still require streaming.



---

Approach C: Time-Bounded Buffering (hybrid, recommended)

Description

This approach introduces two conditions:

Flush when buffer_value tokens are collected OR

Flush when a maximum latency threshold is exceeded (e.g., 100–200 ms)


Pseudo logic:

if len(buffer) >= buffer_value or (now - buffer_start_time) > max_latency:
    flush buffer

Advantages

Predictable upper bound on latency per SSE update.

More efficient than token-by-token streaming.

Stable under variable token arrival intervals.

Ensures that even if tokens arrive slowly, the UI still updates frequently.


Disadvantages

Slightly more complex implementation and testing.

Requires tuning of buffer_value and max_latency parameters.


Suitable When

Both user responsiveness and operational efficiency are priorities.

Token arrival times vary significantly.

The system must scale while maintaining consistent streaming UX.



---

6. Summary and Recommendation

Current Issue

A buffer_value of 25 introduces multi-second latency, even though upstream token arrival is fast. This directly causes delayed UI updates.

Recommendation

Implement Approach C (time-bounded buffering) with:

buffer_value = 3–5

max_latency = 75–150 ms


This balancing strategy ensures:

predictable UI responsiveness,

manageable backend load,

minimal deviation from expected ChatGPT-like streaming behavior.



---

7. Follow-Up Actions

1. Decide which buffering strategy aligns with product and performance goals.


2. Update astream_handler accordingly.


3. Re-run streaming tests to verify latency improvements.


4. Optionally add observability metrics:

per-token arrival latency,

per-flush latency,

buffer accumulation rate,

SSE flush time.





---

If you want, I can produce:

a detailed architectural diagram,

a rewritten version of astream_handler for each approach,

a performance comparison table based on your logs,

or a complete drop-in patch for time-bounded buffering.


Just let me know.